build_process.md, before:

# Build Process

Package build and upload to Pypi is handled by `.github/workflows/publish.yml`. This is triggered by publication of a new tagged release on the [Github releases page](https://github.com/wtclarke/spec2nii/releases). Upload access to Pypi is via stored secret.

[Conda-forge](https://github.com/conda-forge/spec2nii-feedstock) then picks up the new Pypi package automatically.

## Local build (recommended)

Run from the repository root:

```bash
python scripts/build_local.py --clean
```

This command will:

- Create/reuse a local virtual environment (`.venv` by default).
- Install build tooling and project dependencies.
- Build both `sdist` and `wheel` into `dist/`.

Useful options:

- `--skip-install-deps`: Skip dependency installation.
- `--skip-venv`: Use the current Python interpreter instead of a local venv.
- `--venv-dir PATH`: Use a custom virtual environment location.
- `--out-dir PATH`: Write build artifacts to a custom output directory.

## Old manual build process

1. Commit, push and run CI tests
2. git tag -m VX.X.X X.X.X
3. git push github master --tags
4. git clean -fdxn -e prototyping -e *.code-workspace
5. git clean -fdx -e prototyping -e *.code-workspace
6. python setup.py sdist
7. python setup.py bdist_wheel
8. python -m twine upload dist/*

Commit message:

Remove build_local script; update docs to use pip
Delete scripts/build_local.py and simplify local build instructions in build_process.md to recommend using pip install -e . (with an alternative pip install --no-deps -e .).

build_process.md, after:

# Build Process

Package build and upload to Pypi is handled by `.github/workflows/publish.yml`. This is triggered by publication of a new tagged release on the [Github releases page](https://github.com/wtclarke/spec2nii/releases). Upload access to Pypi is via stored secret.

[Conda-forge](https://github.com/conda-forge/spec2nii-feedstock) then picks up the new Pypi package automatically.

## Local build (recommended)

Run from the top-level directory:

```bash
pip install -e .
```

This command will build the package from source and install the project dependencies.

Alternatively:

```bash
pip install --no-deps -e .
```

This will do the same but won't install the dependencies.

## Old manual build process

1. Commit, push and run CI tests
2. git tag -m VX.X.X X.X.X
3. git push github master --tags
4. git clean -fdxn -e prototyping -e *.code-workspace
5. git clean -fdx -e prototyping -e *.code-workspace
6. python setup.py sdist
7. python setup.py bdist_wheel
8. python -m twine upload dist/*
